# Getting Started with Simpla

This guide describes the minimal steps required to publish a website using
Simpla.

Most likely this will not be enough for your needs, so after reading
this, it might be a good idea to head over to [Setting up a Customized
Page](/documentation/02.setting-up-a-customized-page.md).

Simpla consists of two parts:

1. the **Page**, with all configurations, templates and your content
   and
2. the **Engine**, which is wrapped in a Docker container

## 1. Setting up a Page

In order to do anything with Simpla you'll need a Page. That is a
folder, which holds all data related to the site you want to generate.

To be honest, it's not a lot of magic in there. It holds some site
related cofigurations, your templates and assets and the content with
all media files you need for this.

Everything in this folder is explained in great detail in [Setting up a Customized
Page](/documentation/02.setting-up-a-customized-page.md) and even more
in [Extending Simpla](/documentation/04.extending-simpla.md).

### 1.1 Clone the Page Folder from the Simpla Repo

It's absolutely possible to create the Page yourself, but in order to
keep things simple, I'd suggest to simply clone or download the repo and
use the readymade `page` folder from there. ;)

This folder already contains a working website with some pages, blog posts
and everything! You can basically jump to section 2 of this guide
and run the Generator (maybe this is actually not such a bad idea, if you want to
see the system in action right away).

In the meantime, let me walk you through the different parts of the Page
and show you the main parts that need tweaking.

### 1.2 Configurations

All configurations can be found under
`config/config.php`. It's a simple array structure that gets passed
down to every template.

In order for the system to work, a couple of keys are expected:

- `theme`: Defining which theme to use. It refers to the collection of
  templates, that should be found under `page/views/[THEME]/...`
- `base_url`: The full URL under which your site can be found (i.e.
  `https://my-awesome.site/`). This is being used as a prefix for all
internal links, so leave blank for not using absolute URLs internally.
- `title`: That should be the main title of your site. It's used in the
  `header` as well as in the meta tags.
- `tagline`: A succinct description of your website.
- `description`: A short description of this website, which is being
  used for the description meta tag.
- `language`: A language code, that sets the document's language
  attribute (i.e. `en-US` for American English). For more details, see: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/lang
- `author`: A default author that is used if a page or a post does not
  specify one.
- `slugs`: Things need names and in order to make setting up Simpla
  straight forward, you have to define names for a couple of pages ans
namespaces yourself:
    - `post_index`: Defines under which finlename the index with the
      latest blog posts should be stored. Use `index`, if you want to
      run the blog posts on the start page or use anything else (i.e. `blog`)
      if you are using another page as the start page!
    - `feed`: Filename of the RSS feed that gehts generated. I'm
      obviously not very creative, so I'm using `feed` here, but it can
      be anything else!
    - `tag_path`: A URL namespace under which tag related index pages are being published (i.e. `tags`).
- `menus`:
    - Each key defines a menu, which expects a template in `page/views/menus/[MENUNAME].phtml`.
    - Menu items are JSON objects, which consist of:
      - `label`: What should be shown to the user.
      - `type`: Defines the type of an internal URL. Can be either
        `feed` or `content`. `content` is default and ca therefore be
        omitted.
      - A URL, which can be either `external` (so it will simply be
        printed) or `internal` (in this case it is treated as an
internal link and prepended with the `base_url` and appended with the `file_extension_content` or `file_extension_feed`) 

`twitter_handle` and `github_handle` are currently also required, as
they are used in the menu and in the meta tags, but this does not make
a lot of sense and you can either leave them blank or (even better)
remove them from the template, if you don't need them.


As you might have noticed, this is just a simple JSON and nothing
can stop you from extending it. Everything you add will be
available in your templates under `$config->name_of_your_key`.


### 1.3 Adjust Styles

In `views/assets/css` you can find all styles. The default template
makes use of a classless CSS framework called [new.css](https://newcss.net/), which I like quite a bit.

new.css supports [themes](https://newcss.net/themes/) and so all custom styles are placed in the file `new.theme.simpla.css`.
Here you can add or tweak styles and adjust colors through CSS variables.

*(Apart from that, [highlight.js](https://highlightjs.org/) is being used
for rendering code nicely).*

## 2 Add some Content

Simpla knows Blog Posts and Pages. Similar to (`*shiver*`) WordPress,
both are actually the same thing. The only difference is that Posts are
also displayed in index pages (i.e. the start page or tag pages).

For a detailed description of the options, please head over to the
[Creating Content](/documentation/03.creating-content.md) guide.

For now, I would suggest to simply play around with the existing Blog
Posts and Pages and adjust them to your needs (or throw them away).

If you need local media files, you can place them in the `content/img`
folder. It will added to the generated website (without changing
anything about the files!).


## 3. Run the Generator

The generator is designed to be used through the public Docker image and
so generating a website from a `page` folder is nothing more but running
this Docker command:

```SHELL
docker run -it -v /path/local/page:/usr/src/simpla/page -v /path/local/dist:/dist --rm fanatique/simpla:latest
```

Please note: the command mounts to local folders as volumes into the
container:

- ` /path/local/page`: is the path to the Page folder on your local machine.
- ` /path/local/dist`: is where you would like to store the resulting
  files of your generated website.

If you want (and have a PHP installation ready), you can `cd` into your
`dist` folder and run `php -S localhost:8080` in order to create a
locally running preview of your generated website.

